== Structure of the Registry and Registers

=== Registry

The IHO Geospatial Information (GI) Registry shall be hosted on an
IHO server.

=== Registers

A Register is simply a managed list. It is easier to maintain than a
fixed document, because new items can be added as needed to the
Register; and existing items in the Register can be clarified,
superseded or retired. Each Register item has one or more dates
associated with it that indicate when changes in its status occurred.
This means that a Product Specification, defined at a given date, may
reference an item in the Register at that specific point in time. The
IHO GI Registry consists of six Registers:

* Concept Register;
* Data Dictionary Register;
* Portrayal Register;
* Metadata Register;
* Product Specification Register; and
* Producer Code Register.

[[fig1]]
.Relationship between the Registry and the Registers
image::img01.png[width=50%]

A *Concept Register* specifies unique, independent sets of primary
resources of basic information that may be used to describe
geographic, hydrographic, and metadata information. These concepts as
registered in the Concept Register may then be used within the *Data
Dictionary Register* to develop a Feature Catalogue. Unlike a Data
Dictionary Register, a Concept Register does not make associations;
or define type or bindings of concepts to other concepts. From this
perspective, registered items within the Concept Register are
essentially "stateless", which allows for flexibility of the use of
the concepts for suitable data modelling to satisfy the requirements
of Product Specifications.

The *Concept Register* specifies hydrographic core conceptual
information (name, definition, camel case, etc.) corresponding to the
concept; and these concepts can then be utilized within the *Data
Dictionary Register* to satisfy the requirements of data models to be
implemented in S-100 based Product Specifications.

The *Data Dictionary Register* specifies independent sets of
definitions of features, attributes, enumerated values, and
information types that may be used to describe geographic,
hydrographic, and metadata information. The Data Dictionary Register
may be used to assign an item defined in the Concept Register a type
(for example feature, attribute and enumerate value); and define
recommended associations and attribute/feature bindings to facilitate
the development of Feature Catalogues. Items in the Concept Register
can only be registered once against each type in the Data Dictionary
Register in order to support interoperability.

The *Portrayal Register* specifies independent sets of definitions of
point symbols, pattern symbols, complex line styles, and colour
symbols; as well as symbol definitions, colour definitions, portrayal
parameters and portrayal management concepts such as viewing groups.
In addition, the Portrayal Register may be subdivided into different
Domains. The Portrayal Register may be used to develop the Portrayal
Catalogue. Unlike the Portrayal Catalogue, a Portrayal Register does
not define the portrayal rules or bind the portrayal to a feature.

The *Concept*, *Data Dictionary*, *Portrayal* and
*Metadata{blank}footnote:[The Metadata Register has been implemented,
however is still in development.] Registers* are, in effect, managed
lists or dictionaries of items. Selections from these four Registers
are used to define Feature and Portrayal Catalogues used in
individual Product Specifications.

The *Product Specification Register* is a list of S-100 based Product
Specifications, created by recognized organizations, describing meta
information about the content, purpose, version, location and
availability of those Product Specifications.

The *Producer Code Register*{blank}footnote:[The Producer Code
Register will be revised to incorporate the requirements for S-100
based products.] is the authoritative list of the codes which can, if
required, be stipulated in Product Specifications to identify the
producers of a particular data product; for example, Hydrographic
Offices for ENC producer codes.

The Producer Code Register incorporates the up to date list of ENC
Producer Codes that are listed in IHO Publication S-62 -- __ENC
Producer Codes__, together with the S-57 data Producer Codes that
were listed on the Open ECDIS forum website (_www.openecdis.org_).
These downloadable files provide the most up to date records of ENC
data producers. IHO Publication S-62 - now titled _List of Data
Producer Codes_ is an on-demand copy of the contents of the Producer
Code Register; and can be downloaded directly from the IHO GI
Registry.

A machine readable XML version of the IHO Producer Codes will be
available for use in systems when the operational version of the
S-101 ENC Product Specification is published by the IHO.

The Data Producer Code Register is sub divided as follows:

* Producer Codes allocated to State authorities for use in products
authorized by the parent State; and
* All other Producer Codes.

==== S-100 Test Bed

The *S-100 Test Bed* is a system to support the development of new
Product Specifications based on the S-100 framework. Within the Test
Bed, S-100 stakeholders and recognized organizations can create a new
Product Specification and share their on-going project's results,
such as new draft versions of the Product Specification document;
catalogue XML files; test datasets; and scenario's for validation.
Only S-100 based Product Specifications that pass the whole Test Bed
process can be transferred to the Product Specification Register as
an active specification.

[[cls-2.3]]
=== Domains

Within the Data Dictionary, Portrayal and the Metadata Registers each
entry is assigned to a recognised Domain. The purpose of designating
Domains and a related Domain Control Body is to ensure that the key
stakeholders (as represented by the Domains) are consulted in any
subsequent proposals to adjust items contained in a Register.

The Concept Register contains the core conceptual items that may be
used within the Data Dictionary Register. As such, the Concept
Register is essentially "domainless". However, the Concept Register
does have a Domain Control Body, which is comprised of the
representatives of each of the Domains within the Data Dictionary
Register.

The Data Dictionary Register encompasses Hydrographic-related domains
such as nautical charts, nautical publications, inland ENC, port ENC,
water levels and currents, and marine information overlays (MIO); as
well as marine-related Domains for other international organizations
such as the World Meteorological Organization (for sea ice and
weather), IALA (aids to navigation), and the International
Electrotechnical Commission. Other maritime data Domains may be
included over time as the Registry expands and is used more widely.

[[fig2]]
.Domains within Registers
image::img02.png[width=50%]

==== Establishment of Domains

Any recognized organization can propose a new Domain. A Register
Manager may also propose a new Domain depending on the requirements
of a Register, its existing users or an awareness of any potential
new users or new requirements.

The body responsible for the approval of the establishment of new
Domains in a Register is the IHO Hydrographic Services and Standards
Committee (HSSC). The following information shall be provided to the
HSSC via the Register Manager for proposals for any new Domains:

* a short description of the proposing organization or body (name,
role, etc.);
* an official point of contact, including email and other relevant
contact details;
* the proposed name of the new Domain;
* a clear statement of the intended scope of the proposed domain;
* a justification for the proposal; and
* a confirmation of willingness of the proposing organization or body
to act as Domain Owner and provide representation to the Register
Domain Control Body.

An application form for proposing a new Domain shall be available on
the IHO GI Registry website.

The Register Manager shall be responsible for processing applications.

The Executive Control Body shall review and endorse any proposals and
the HSSC shall decide on proposals for new Domains on behalf of the
Registry Owner (IHO).
