== Administration of Registers

=== Proposals

Submitting Organization representatives may submit proposals for new
items; or for clarification, supersession, or retirement of valid
registered items. Proposals are to be submitted using the mechanisms
provided in the Registry web interface for the relevant Register.

==== Addition of Registered Items

An Addition is the insertion into a Register of a new item that
describes a concept not adequately described by a valid item already
in the Register.

==== Clarification of Registered Items

A Clarification corrects errors in spelling, punctuation, grammar or
improvements to content or wording. A clarification shall not cause
any substantive semantic change to a registered item. The three
characteristics that may be clarified are definition, other
references, and remarks.

==== Supersession of Registered Items

A Supersession of an item means any proposal that would result in a
substantive semantic change to an existing valid item, such as a
change to the name of an item or its camelCase identifier; or a
change in the portrayal of an item in the Portrayal Register.
Supersession shall be accomplished by including one or more new items
in the appropriate Register with new identifiers and a more recent
date. The original item shall remain in the Register but must include
the date at which it was superseded, and a reference to the items
that superseded it.

==== Retirement of Registered Items

A Retirement shall be effected by leaving an item in the Register,
but by marking it as "__retired__"; and including the date of
retirement.

=== Proposal Process -- Concept, Data Dictionary, Portrayal and Metadata Registers

Submitting Organizations shall manage the development of proposals
for entries or amendments to the Concept, Data Dictionary, Portrayal
and Metadata Registers from within their respective Working Groups,
communities or organizations.

The process for submitting proposals for the registration of items in
the Concept, Data Dictionary and Portrayal Registers is illustrated
in <<fig4-1;and!fig4-2>> below.

[[fig4-1]]
.Processing of Proposals -- Concept Register
image::img03.png[]

[[fig4-2]]
.Processing of Proposals -- Data Dictionary, Portrayal and Metadata Registers
image::img04.png[]

==== Submission Process

The Submitting Organization representative shall:

. receive proposals for the registration of items from proposers
within their respective Working Groups, communities or organizations;

. ensure that all proposals are logical and complete and are
consistent with other registered items within the Register; and

. submit proposals to the appropriate Register through the submission
process in the IHO GI Registry interface.

The Register Manager shall:

. receive proposals from Submitting Organizations representatives;

. review proposals for completeness;

. return proposals to the Submitting Organization representative if
incomplete or inconsistent; and

. update the item management record, with the _proposalStatus_ set to
'notYetDetermined'.

The Register Manager shall use the following criteria to determine if
a proposal is complete:

. the proposal is from a recognized Submitting Organization
representative;

. the proposed item falls within the scope of the Register or domain;
and

. a registered item (or similar) to the proposed item does not
already exist.

If the decision of the Register Manager is positive, the proposal
shall be forwarded to the Register Domain Control Body for approval.
If the decision of the Register Manager is negative, the proposal
shall be returned to the Submitting Organization representative for
rework or cancellation as required.

==== Approval Process

The process for determining the acceptability of proposals is
illustrated in <<fig4-1;and!fig4-2>> above. The approval process
shall normally be completed within a time period of 60 days. In the
case of appeal this period shall be extended to 90 days.

The Register Manager shall ensure the following:

. if the proposal is for clarification or retirement of a Register
item, set the _itemStatus_ of the item to 'processing'; and forward
the proposal to the Register Domain Control Body; or

. if the proposal is for registration of a new item or supersession
of an existing Register item:

.. assign an _itemIdentifier_ to the new or superseding item,

.. set the _itemStatus_ of the item to 'processing'; and

.. inform the Register Domain Control Body of the new proposal within
five working days.

The Register Domain Control Body can decide to:

. accept the proposal without change;

. accept the proposal subject to changes negotiated with the
Submitting Organization; or

. not accept the proposal.

Criteria for not accepting a proposal include (but may not be
restricted to):

. the specification of the item is incomplete or incomprehensible;

. an identical or very similar item already exists in the Register or
in another Register of the Registry;

. the proposed item does not belong to an item class included in the
Register;

. the proposed item does not fall within the scope of the Register; or

. the justification for the proposal is inadequate.

Each Domain Control Body member shall inform the Register Manager of
their Working Group / organization's decision, and the rationale for
that decision, within 60 days of receipt of the proposal through the
approval process in the IHO GI Registry interface. Nil returns will
be taken as acceptance of the proposal.

The Register Manager shall:

. serve as the point of contact if there is a need for negotiations
between a Submitting Organization and the Register Domain Control
Body regarding any changes required to a proposal that may be
specified by the Domain Control Body as a condition of acceptance; and

. inform the Submitting Organization representative of the results of
processing the proposal.

If the decision of the Register Domain Control Body is positive, the
Register Manager shall, in accordance with policies for the Register:

. complete the proposal management record with _proposalStatus_ set
to 'accepted', and _dateAccepted_ to the date of the Domain Control
Body's decision;

. make approved changes to the content of the Register item; and

. set the Register item _itemStatus_ to 'valid', 'clarified',
'superseded', or 'retired', as appropriate.

If the decision of the Register Domain Control Body is negative, the
Register Manager shall:

. update the proposal management record by setting _proposalStatus_
to 'rejected', and _dateAmended_ to the date of the Domain Control
Body's decision;

. inform the Submitting Organization of the 60 working day deadline
for appealing the decision of the Domain Control Body; and

. make the results of the approval process available to all
interested parties.

Submitting Organization representatives shall:

. negotiate with the Register Domain Control Body through the
Register Manager, regarding any changes to their proposals that are
specified by the Domain Control Body as a condition of acceptance; and

. make known to the proposer and within their respective Submitting
Organization communities or organizations the decisions taken on
proposals by the Domain Control Body as transmitted to them by the
Register Manager.

==== Withdrawal of Proposals

Submitting Organizations may decide to withdraw a proposal, using the
withdrawal process in the IHO GI Registry interface, at any time
during the approval process.

The Register Manager shall then:

. change the proposal management _proposalStatus_ from
'notYetDetermined' to 'withdrawn';

. change the proposal management value for _dateAmended_ to the
current date; and

. keep track of the proposal and report the withdrawal in the next
periodic report.

==== Appeals

A Submitting Organization representative may appeal to the Register
Executive Control Body if it disagrees with the decision of the
Register Domain Control Body to reject a proposal for addition,
clarification, supersession or retirement of an item in the Register.
An appeal shall contain at a minimum a description of the situation;
a justification for the appeal; and a statement of the impact if the
appeal is not successful. The appeal process is included in the
overall proposal process as shown in <<fig4-1;and!fig4-2>> above.

The Submitting Organization shall:

. determine if the decision regarding a proposal for registration is
acceptable; and

. if not, submit an appeal to the Register Manager through the appeal
process in the IHO GI Registry interface.

The Register Manager shall:

. if an appeal is submitted:

.. change the proposal management _proposalStatus_ of the item to
'appeal'; and

.. forward the appeal to the Executive Control Body; or

. if there is no appeal by the deadline for submitting an appeal, the
Register Manager shall change the status of the proposal management
record to 'rejected'; and change the _dateAmended_ to the current
date.

The Register Executive Control Body shall:

. process the appeal in conformance with its established procedures;

. decide whether to accept or reject the appeal; and

. communicate the decision to the Register Manager.

The Register Manager shall:

. update the proposal management record fields _proposalStatus_ and
_dateAmended_;

. update the Register item _itemStatus_; and

. provide the results of the decision to the Register Domain Control
Body and to the Submitting Organization representative.

The Submitting Organization shall:

. make the results of the appeal known within their Submitting
Organization Working Group, community or organization.

=== Proposal Process -- Data Dictionary Register

After ensuring all required items for inclusion in an S-100 based
Product Specification have been included in the Concept Register,
Product Specification developers can further develop these concepts
to align with their Product Specification Application Schema within
the Data Dictionary Register. This includes assignment of type and
feature/attribute binding of concepts as required within discrete
Domains. When used in the Data Dictionary Register, a concept
continues to maintain a direct relationship to its "core" item in the
Concept Register; such that it is updated automatically when the core
concept has been modified. The Data Dictionary Register has a
different submission process to the Concept, Portrayal and Metadata
Registers; and this is illustrated in <<fig4-2>>.

==== Submission Process

Submitting Organization representatives shall:

. receive proposals for the registration of items from proposers
within their respective Submitting Organization Working Groups,
communities or organizations;

. ensure that all proposals are logical and complete and are
consistent with other features, attributes and enumerated values; and

. submit proposals to the appropriate Domain within the Register
through the proposal process in the IHO GI Registry interface.

The Register Manager shall ensure the following:

. if the proposal is for clarification or retirement of a Register
item, forward the proposal to the Register Domain Control Body; or

. if the proposal is for registration of a new item or supersession
of an existing Register item:

.. assign an _itemIdentifier_ to the new or superseding item,

.. set the _itemStatus_ of the item to 'processing'; and

.. inform the Register Domain Control Body of the new proposal
within five working days.

==== Approval Process

The Domain Control Body may decide to:

. accept the proposal without change;

. accept the proposal subject to changes negotiated with the
Submitting Organization representative; or

. not accept the proposal.

Criteria for not accepting a proposal include:

. the specification of the item is incomplete or incomprehensible;

. an identical or very similar item already exists in the Register;

. the proposed item does not belong to an item class included in the
Register;

. the proposed item does not fall within the scope of the Register;
or

. the justification for the proposal is inadequate.

Each Register Domain Control Body member shall inform the Register
Manager of their Working Group / organization's decision, and the
rationale for that decision, within 30 days of receipt of the
proposal through the approval process in the IHO GI Registry
interface. Nil returns will be taken as acceptance of the proposal.

The Register Manager shall:

. serve as the point of contact if there is a need for negotiations
between the Submitting Organization representative and the Register
Domain Control Body regarding any changes required to a proposal
that may be specified by the Domain Control Body as a condition of
acceptance; and

. inform the Submitting Organization representative of the results
of processing the proposal.

If the decision of the Register Domain Control Body is positive, the
Register Manager shall, in accordance with policies for the Register:

. complete the proposal management record with _proposalStatus_ set
to 'accepted', and _dateAccepted_ to the date of the Domain Control
Body's decision;

. make approved changes to the content of the Register item; and

. set the Register item _itemStatus_ to 'valid', 'superseded',
'modified' or 'retired', as appropriate.

If the decision of the Register Domain Control Body is negative:

. update the proposal management record by setting _proposalStatus_
to 'rejected', and _dateAmended_ to the date of the Domain Control
Body's decision;

. inform the Submitting Organization representative of the 60
working day deadline for appealing the decision of the Domain
Control Body; and

. make the results of the approval process available to all
interested parties.

Submitting Organization representatives shall:

. negotiate with the Register Domain Control Body through the
Register Manager, regarding any changes to their proposals that are
specified by the Domain Control Body as a condition of acceptance;
and

. make known to the proposer and within their respective Submitting
Organization communities or organizations the decisions taken on
proposals by the Register Domain Control Body as transmitted to them
by the Register Manager.

==== Withdrawal of Proposals

Submitting Organization representatives may decide to withdraw a
proposal, using the withdrawal process in the IHO GI Registry
interface, at any time during the approval process.

The Register Manager shall then:

. change the proposal management _proposalStatus_ from
'notYetDetermined' to 'withdrawn';

. change the proposal management value for _dateAmended_ to the
current date; and

. keep track of the proposal and report the withdrawal in the next
periodic report.

=== Proposal Process -- Product Specification Register

Representatives of organizations may submit submissions for the
addition of new Product Specifications in the Product Specification
Register; or for the Clarification, Supersession, or Retirement of
existing Product Specifications in the Register. Requests are to be
submitted using the mechanisms provided in the IHO GI Registry web
interface.

==== Acceptance Criteria

===== IHO Product Specifications

Product Specifications that have been adopted by the IHO will be
recorded or referenced in the Register. These Product Specifications
will carry the identifying code S-1__nn__ and will also have a plain
language title.

===== Other Product Specifications

Product Specifications that have been developed by other competent
organizations may be recorded or referenced in the Register provided
that:

. they use S-100 as the underlying framework standard (organizations
are encouraged to populate Feature Catalogues, either using existing
entities registered in the IHO GI Registry or proposing new ones to
the Registry where appropriate);

. any identification number or the plain language title used does
not infer that it is an IHO standard or that it has received any
endorsement or approval of the IHO; and

. the content description is described in plain language.

==== Submission Process

The Working Group, community or organization making a submission
shall ensure that the new Product Specification:

. is complete; and

. is made available to the Register Manager.

The Register Manager shall:

. receive the submission from the Working Group, community or
organization;

. review the Product Specification for completeness;

. return the submission to the Working Group, community or
organization if incomplete; and

. update the item management record, with the _proposalStatus_ set
to 'notYetDetermined'.

The Register Manager shall use the following criteria to determine
if a submission is complete:

. it falls within the scope of the Register; or

. a registered item (or similar) to the proposed does not already
exist.

==== Approval Process

The Register Manager shall ensure that all aspects of the submission
have been satisfied and all components of the Product Specification
have been supplied.

The Register Manager shall:

. create a new Register item for the Product Specification; and

. inform the Working Group, community or organization that the
Product Specification has been included as an item in the Register.

=== Proposal Process -- Producer Code Register

Representatives of organizations that require a data Producer Code
shall submit applications for a Producer Code, via an email to the
Register Manager, using a link available in the IHO GI Registry web
interface.

The Producer Code Register is used as the source for IHO Publication
S-62 -- _List of IHO Data Producer Codes_.

==== Eligibility Criteria

===== Government Authorities

Data Producer Codes allocated to Governments, authorized
Hydrographic Offices or other relevant government institutions will
be recorded in the Register. Distinction is made in the Register
between IHO Member State authorities and non-IHO Member State
authorities.

Data producers allocated with a Government Authority Producer Code
are considered to be the producers of "official" ENC datasets.

===== Other Producing Authorities

Data Producer Codes allocated to all other competent organizations
and entities will also be included in the Register; and will be
distinguished from those allocated to government authorities.

Data producers allocated with an Other Producing Agency Producer
Code are considered to be the producers of "non-official" S-57
datasets.

==== Submission of Applications

The organization making the application shall ensure that all
applications are complete.

The Register Manager shall:

. receive applications from applicants;

. review applications for suitability and completeness; and

. return applications to the applicant if incomplete.

==== Approval Process

The Register Manager shall ensure that:

. a suitable entry does not already exist in the Register, and if
not;

. allocate a Producer Code and assign it to a category (Member
State, Other State or Other); and

. inform the applicant within 10 working days.

The Register Manager shall:

. serve as the point of contact if there is a need for negotiations
with an applicant regarding any changes required to an application.

==== Appeals

An applicant may appeal to the Executive Control Body (and
ultimately the HSSC) if it disagrees with the decision of the
Register Manager to reject an application.

The applicant shall submit its appeal to the Register Manager.

The Register Manager shall:

. forward the appeal to the Executive Control Body or HSSC as
appropriate, and

. inform the appellant of the decision.
